# Introduction

Amaranth is a reference-based transcript assembler
specifically optimized for single-cell RNA-seq data.
The development of Amaranth has been based on the [Scallop2](https://github.com/Shao-Group/scallop2)/[Scallop](https://github.com/Kingsford-Group/scallop) assembler series.

# Installation

Install from source code: clone the source code of Amaranth from

`git clone https://github.com/Shao-Group/amaranth.git`

Amaranth uses additional libraries of Boost and htslib. 
If they have not been installed in your system, you first
need to download and install them. You might also need to
export the runtime library path to certain environmental
variable (for example, `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`, for most linux distributions).
After install these dependencies, you then compile the source code of Amaranth.
If some of the above dependencies are not installed to the default system 
directories (for example, `/usr/local`, for most linux distributions),
their corresponding installing paths should be specified to `configure` of Amaranth.
The entire installation typically takes a few minutes to complete.

## Download Boost

If Boost has not been downloaded/installed, download Boost
[(license)](http://www.boost.org/LICENSE_1_0.txt) from (http://www.boost.org).
Uncompress it somewhere (compiling and installing are not necessary).

## Install htslib

If htslib has not been installed, download htslib 
[(license)](https://github.com/samtools/htslib/blob/develop/LICENSE)
from (http://www.htslib.org/) with version 1.5 or higher.
Note that htslib relies on zlib. So if zlib has not been installed in your system,
you need to install zlib first. To do so, download zlib
[(license)](https://zlib.net/zlib_license.html) at (https://zlib.net/).
Use the following commands to install zlib:

```
./configure
make
make install
```

After installing zlib, use the following commands to build htslib:

```
./configure --disable-bz2 --disable-lzma --disable-gcs --disable-s3 --enable-libcurl=no
make
make install
```

The default installation location of htslib is `/usr/lib`.
If you would install it to a different location, replace the above `configure` line with
the following (by adding `--prefix=/path/to/your/htslib` to the end):

```
./configure --disable-bz2 --disable-lzma --disable-gcs --disable-s3 --enable-libcurl=no --prefix=/path/to/your/htslib
```

In this case, you also need to export the runtime library path (note that there
is an additional `lib` following the installation path):

```
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/path/to/your/htslib/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

## Build 

Use the following to compile:

```
./configure --with-htslib=/path/to/your/htslib --with-boost=/path/to/your/boost
make
```

If some of the dependencies are installed in the default system directory (for example, `/usr/lib`),
then the corresponding `--with-` option might not be necessary.
The executable file `amaranth` will appear at `src/amaranth`.


# Usage

The usage of `amaranth` is:

```
./amaranth -i <input.bam> -o <output.gtf> [options]
```

The `input.bam` is the read alignment file generated by some RNA-seq aligner, (for example, STAR or HISAT2).
Make sure that it is sorted; otherwise run `samtools` to sort it:

```
samtools sort input.bam > input.sort.bam
```

The reconstructed transcripts shall be written as gtf format into `output.gtf`.

Here is a list of supported parameters. Please refer to additional explanations below the table.

 Parameters | Default Value | Description
 ------------------------- | ------------- | ----------
 --help  | | print usage of amaranth and exit
 --version | | print version of amaranth and exit
 --preview | | show the inferred `library_type` and exit
 --verbose | 1 | chosen from {0, 1, 2}
 -f/--transcript_fragments    | | file to which the assembled non-full-length transcripts will be written to
 --library_type               | empty | chosen from {empty, unstranded, first, second}
 --assemble_duplicates		  | 10 | the number of consensus runs of the decomposition
 --min_transcript_coverage    | 1.5 | the minimum coverage required to output a multi-exon transcript
 --min_single_exon_coverage   | 20 | the minimum coverage required to output a single-exon transcript
 --min_transcript_length_base      |150 | the minimum base length of a transcript
 --min_transcript_length_increase  | 50 | the minimum increased length of a transcript with each additional exon
 --min_mapping_quality        | 1 | ignore reads with mapping quality less than this value
 --max_num_cigar              | 1000 | ignore reads with CIGAR size larger than this value
 --min_bundle_gap             | 100 | the minimum distances required to start a new bundle
 --min_num_hits_in_bundle     | 5 | the minimum number of reads required in a bundle
 --min_flank_length           | 3 | the minimum match length required in each side for a spliced read
 --min_splice_bundary_hits    | 1 | the minimum number of spliced reads required to support a junction
 --min_umi_reads_bundle | 1 |(int) Bundle with less UMI reads than this threshold will be ignored
 --min_umi_ratio_bundle           | 0.0           | (float) Bundle with lower UMI reads ratio than this threshold will be ignored 
 --both_umi_support               | not used      | If set a bundle need to satisfy both `min_umi_reads_bundle` and `min_umi_ratio_bundle`. Otherwise, satisfy either of them is ok 
--min_umi_reads_start_exon | 1 | (int) mininum number of UMI reads support of the first exon in a valid transcript 
 --no-remove-reteind-intron       | not used      |
 --remove-reteind-intron          | used          |
 --max_ir_part_ratio_v | 0.5 | the ratio threshold of retained node to skip edge for partial introns (if greater than threshold, consider true transcript)
 --max_ir_part_ratio_e | 0.5 | the ratio threshold of retained node's edge to skip edge for partial introns (if greater than threshold, consider true transcript)
 --max_ir_full_ratio_v | 1.0 | the ratio threshold of retained node to skip edge for full introns (if greater than threshold, consider true transcript)
 --max_ir_full_ratio_e | 0.5 | the ratio threshold of retained node's edge to skip edge for full introns (if greater than threshold, consider true transcript)
 --max_ir_full_ratio_i | 10.0 | the ratio threshold of retained node to its own edge for full introns (if greater than threshold, consider true RETENTION) 
 --remove-pcr-duplicates          | 0             | 0 (not remove) or 1 (remove w.r.t alignment coordinates and CIGAR string) 


1. For `--verbose`, 0: quiet; 1: one line for each splice graph; 2: details of graph decomposition.

2. `--library_type` is highly recommended to provide. The `unstranded`, `first`, and `second`
correspond to `fr-unstranded`, `fr-firststrand`, and `fr-secondstrand` used in standard Illumina
sequencing libraries. If none of them is given, i.e., it is `empty` by default, then amaranth
will try to infer the `library_type` by itself (see `--preview`). Notice that such inference is based
on the `XS` tag stored in the input `bam` file. If the input `bam` file do not contain `XS` tag,
then it is essential to provide the `library_type` to amaranth. You can try `--preview` to see
the inferred `library_type`.

3. `--min_transcript_coverage` is used to filter lowly expressed transcripts: amaranth will filter
out transcripts whose (predicted) raw counts (number of moleculars) is less than this number.

4. `--min_transcript_length_base` and `--min_transcript_length_increase` is combined to filter
short transcripts: the minimum length of a transcript is given by `--min_transcript_length_base`
\+ `--min_transcript_length_increase` * num-of-exons-in-this-transcript. Transcripts that are less
than this number will be filtered out.
